A database is a collection of
information organized so that it can be accessed, managed, and updated.
A blockchain is a type of database.
But how do you know when a blockchain is the right type
of database and when it might not be the best solution?
To start, it helps to understand some of
the core characteristics of a traditional database.
In this video, we'll look at the basics of
a traditional database using five basic characteristics.
We'll discuss the basics of the network, functions,
mutability, authorization, and transparency of the traditional system.
With a better idea of how a traditional database
works you'll be able to more easily compare it to a blockchain.
First, how does the network of a traditional database operate?
Here, data is stored and maintained by a central authority.
This authority collects, manages,
and owns this information.
To get access to the data users need authentication from the database administrator.
Let's use an airline as an example.
In this case, the airline is the central authority that collects and owns the data.
To access this information you'll either need to work with the airline
or get authentication to access the information through something like their website.
Once having permission to access the database,
there's a few functions available for you to work with in the data.
A traditional database allows for four basic functions;
create, read, update, and delete.
These functions are called CRUD for short.
These give users the flexibility to not only retrieve and add new data,
but to remove and change data as well.
This provides a lot of flexibility for the database.
For the airline, a benefit of this would be that they can do
things like create new flight records or update existing ones.
The functions available on a traditional dataset are set up so that the data is mutable.
Data being mutable means that the records can be
updated after being added to the database.
This could be helpful in the case that an airline no longer offers a particular route.
They can delete this data to ensure it doesn't show up in customer searches.
This is useful, but there's also a potential downside to this.
A flight could be deleted accidentally or even
deleted on purpose by someone trying to hurt the system.
There's usually security to ensure this doesn't happen,
but it's definitely possible.
Next, let's look at how authorization is handled on a traditional database.
The central authority that manages
the database is also in charge of handling it's authorization.
The airlines needs can influence how they
decided to structure their database and who they give access to.
Users of this system rely on
the security infrastructure set up by the airlines database administrators.
One way the data is kept secure is by managing the transparency of the information.
In a traditional database,
the authority in control of the data grants permissions to it's users.
They have complete control over permissions for each of the CRUD operations we mentioned.
Maybe you can create data by booking
a flight but you can't delete it without calling the airline first.
This all depends on the permission level set by the authority in charge of the data.
Since by default all the data is restricted,
traditional databases are considered to have a low level of transparency.
That wraps up this basic overview.
To recap, in this section we discussed five characteristics of a traditional database.
We now know that the network is dependent on a centralized authority.
The functions available on the database are to create,
read, update, and delete known as CRUD.
These operations allow you to make changes to the data which means that it's mutable.
Security is completely in the hands of the central authority that owns the data.
Finally, these databases are generally not very transparent.
This is a pretty high level overview but hopefully it gives you enough to have
some intuition on when a traditional database could be used as an effective solution.
Next, we'll look at how these characteristics compared to that of a blockchain.